The new Minister of Finance, Tito Mboweni, delivered his “maiden” medium-term budget policy statement four weeks ago in Parliament. The metrics were bad and took the markets by surprise, and as a result, the rand tanked and bond yields spiked. But there were elements of the medium-term budget policy statement that were courageous. To his credit, the minister took on the wreckers inside the governing party, warning them not to attack the mandate and independence of the reserve bank. Which is exactly what the wreckers inside the governing party needed to be told as they force us closer to the brink. We are in deep economic trouble and the minister was absolutely right when he warned that we are at a crossroads. We have a growth problem, with an average economic growth rate of 2% expected over the medium term between 2019/20 and 2021/22. We have a revenue problem, with a revenue shortfall of R57 billion expected over the medium term between 2019/20 and 2021/22. We have an expenditure problem, with an expenditure overrun of R23 billion over the medium term between 2019/20 and 2021/22. We have a state-owned enterprises problem, with zombie state-owned enterprises requiring billions of rands in bailouts between 2019/20 and 2021/22. We have a deficit problem, with our fiscal deficit expected to blow out to R251 billion, or 4% of GDP, by 2021/22. We have a debt problem, with our national debt expected to reach a staggering R3.7 trillion, or 59% of GDP, by 2021/22. And we remain a small open economy with “twin deficits” making us vulnerable to external shocks. Which is why we welcome the minister’s announcement that it is now time to consider a new “fiscal anchor”. The aim of fiscal policy has been to stabilize national debt, which has been a spectacular failure given the fact that national debt will increase from R627 billion, or 26% of GDP, in 2008/09, to a staggering R3.7 trillion, or 59% of GDP, in 2021/22. What this means is that we will be spending a staggering R247 billion on debt service costs in 2021/22, which is the equivalent of what we will spend on basic education this year, in 2018/19. We think the solution is a statutory fiscal rule and we are in the advanced stages of preparing a Private Members Bill, called the Fiscal Responsibility Bill, which will make provision for a “debt ceiling”. We cannot go on like this and we hope that the minister will not allow himself to be muzzled and will continues to take on the wreckers inside the governing party. He started off well by: Which, of course, was greeted with horror by the wreckers inside the governing party, because they still reminisce fondly about the good of days of Check Point Charlie and Aeroflot. The minister needs to take on: He needs to take on The minister needs to take on: Of course, there is one wrecker the minister does not have to take on and that is Yunus Carrim, because he is a “Communist of a Special Type”. He fights the struggle of the working class, not from the factory floor, or from the plains of Outer Mongolia as he often claims, but from the lobbies of the most lavish hotels in Washington. And that is because his best kept secret is … wait for it … that despite being a leading member of the Communist Party, he serves as a board member on the parliamentary network of …wait for it … the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. Oh, and the minister should not forget Nomvule Mokonyane, who is more of a nutter than a wrecker, and who thinks that we can just “pick up the rand”. In the end, we welcome the fact that the minister: We know he has had a bad start, but things will get better and we look forward to debating the best ideas to take us forward in South Africa.