As we embark on the annual 16 Days of Activism Against Gender-based Violence, the Democratic Alliance in the Northern Cape calls on the Provincial Police Commissioner, Rismati Shivuri, to ensure that SAPS redoubles its efforts to apprehend and bring perpetrators of violence to justice without re-victimizing the victims. For far too long, criminals have been allowed to roam our streets due to poor SAPS investigative work, further traumatizing victims of crime. During the recent leg of my Provincial Listening Tour, I met with two young women who were the victims of horrific rapes. In both cases, the women were let down by the very same police service meant to protect them. In the first case, the extremely delayed response from the police in Kimberley meant that the rapist could escape on foot. To date, he has not been caught and we are left to wonder how many other women have fallen prey to him since. In the second case, the police in Hartswater turned away a nineteen year old who reported being raped by the boyfriend of a family member. Police told her that there was nothing they could do. Aside from these two examples, which could have been avoided if the police officers in question acted with professionalism and honesty, there are too many police stations in the province without the necessary infrastructure and equipment to deliver an adequate service to victims. As a response from the Northern Cape Department of Transport, Safety & Liaison revealed earlier this year, 21 police stations in the province do not have victim-friendly rooms as required by law. This constitutes 24% of the police stations in the Northern Cape, which means that 1 in every 4 communities still do not have the level of service and protection they deserve. We are thankful for the daily service from the men and women in blue who do protect their communities, but it is clear that more needs to be done to establish a professional and honest police service in the Northern Cape. Only change under a DA-led government can transform the police into an honest and professional service which protects communities from crime, brings perpetrators to justice and improves the safety of our people.