The following speech was delivered in Parliament today by the DA Member of the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education, Chantel King MP. 1994 was an important year for South Africa.  It ushered in a democratic society committed to the eradication of racism, sexism and all forms of discrimination.  It brought political change that promised the building of a rainbow nation, committed to the ideals of equity and redress. 24 years on, the question is raised about how far our country has come in addressing equity and inequality in education, following the ideals of Nelson Mandela. Just like the miners in Marikana , and the 144 service delivery protest which have taken place this year alone, students and workers have made it clear: they want change and they are tired of waiting on this government.  It is doubtful though that such structural changes can be brought about by politics of the crowd. The ANC government’s underspending of the Education Infrastructure Grant and the lackadaisical approach to infrastructure development at schools directly led to the deaths of Lumka Mkhethwa in Bizana and Michael Komape (for which the North West education department refused to take responsibility), who died inhumanely when they fell into pit latrine toilets. This is just the tip of the iceberg. The Eastern Cape Department of Education cannot even give proper sanitation to 1,598 schools and the Department of Basic Education’s reach to 18,242 second chance matric learners illustrate that more needs to be done to address the learner throughput rate in South Africa. Our history alone is not the only reason why our education system is failing. Constant shifts in educational curriculum, lack of monitoring and evaluation systems, no clear policy direction, union interference, sex and cash for jobs, and the absence of leadership are all eating away at the seams of our eroding education system.  The ultimate victims of this crime against humanity are our children! Why is it then that out of nine provincial education departments, the Western Cape Education Department always remain a benchmark for others to follow? Policy certainty, clear vision and leadership, proper monitoring and control measures, integrated education systems, and a workforce that has the necessary skills to ensure quality services that caters to the needs and abilities of learners are delivered. There is little doubt that a learner educated in the Western Cape has a better chance of employment, seeing that the Western Cape created 75% of the jobs in South Africa this year. Now that is responding to the needs of our people! The fixation of the Department of Basic Education to have talk shops in luxurious hotels on the successes and failures of our education system indicate that our children’s rights die one PowerPoint at a time. In this context one can’t but think that the appeals that are premised on the ANC government being willing to act in the best interest of the learners are falling on deaf ears. So let me try a more utilitarian argument. To enhance peace and citizenship, curriculum models have to provide for more flexible pathways to develop learners’ abilities and talents, improve efficiency in provision of education, and reduction of waste. Unless young people’s skills are developed for work, they will ultimately be excluded from active participation in society and, when educational delivery is characterised with exclusion and inequality, it can exacerbate conflict and instability. So let’s stop the race divide and focus on the development and education of our children in building One South Africa for All.