The DA welcomes the announcement by the Essential Services Committee (ESC) that it will soon accept submissions from members of the public with regards to key school staff being declared an essential service (see announcement here). Earlier this year, we submitted an application to the ESC calling for a minimum service level to be declared for school staff and we are pleased that the ESC has given our submission serious consideration. It is essential that -regardless of any political or civil unrest- learners are prioritized. They need to be safe at school and being educated. The first place to address the challenges of lack of economic opportunity and access to jobs is to fix our dysfunctional education system. With an economy that is ailing, we need to ensure that schools produce learners who are job market-ready. Learners across South Africa are affected by strikes which occur yearly and the absence of school staff during strikes or trade union meetings compromises their safety and security. The DA therefore raised three important concerns to the ESC in requesting a minimum service level declaration: It is the duty of staff members to protect and care for children during school hours, when they are away from their parents and guardians. Establishing a minimum service level will ensure that the school staff members entrusted with this critical duty always carry it out. School safety is an issue which the DA believes demands greater attention from the government. In our letter to President Cyril Ramaphosa, we listed the establishment of a minimum service level for school staff as one of our demands for safer schools. The ESC will hear oral representations as follows: Port Elizabeth Date: 11 July Venue: CCMA Offices, 97 Govan Mbeki Avenue Time: 10.30am  Durban Date: 13 July Venue: CCMA Offices, 275 Anton Lembede Street, 6th & 7th Floor, Embassy House Time: 10.30am  Cape Town Date: 16 July Venue: CCMA Offices, 78 Darling Street Time: 10.30am  Bloemfontein Date: 17 July Venue: CCMA Offices, Corner Elizabeth & West Burger Streets Time: 10.30am  Johannesburg Date: 20 July Venue: CCMA Offices, 28 Harrison Street, 8th floor Time: 10.30am The DA encourages all interested parties to submit comments regarding the establishment of a minimum service level for key school staff. Having these key posts declared essential services will guarantee learners a safe environment, which will help them secure bright futures and maximise their chances of getting jobs after school.