The following speech was delivered in Parliament today by the DA Shadow Minister of Basic Education, Ian Ollis MP, during the debate on Human Rights Day. Speaker, In 2017, at the AB Xuma Primary School in Soweto, 87 pupils were raped or sexually assaulted by a scholar patrol man who was supposed to be looking after their safety. He was finally caught and arrested. It has now come to light that the police investigator appointed to investigate their case has now himself allegedly raped or sexually assaulted two of the victims during the investigation. Let’s remember that these victims are school children in primary school! On 26 September last year, a gunman entered the Edalinceba Primary School in Duduza in Gauteng at 11 am, walked straight through to the deputy principal’s office and shot him dead. On 11 September 2017, a video went viral on the internet showing a school principal and two teachers gang raping a child in a school in the Esikhawini district in KwaZulu-Natal. Eventually, a second video of a separate rape incident surfaced in the area and seven teachers were eventually suspended. On 29 September 2017, a seven-year-old child from Brakpan in Grade 2, shocked teachers and pupils by bringing a loaded gun to school to shoot a “bully” he claimed was tormenting him. In 2017, it also came to light that 16 pupils had fallen pregnant over the past three years at Bothitong High School, near Kuruman in the Northern Cape, with the department and police struggling to find the culprits. Rape and teenage pregnancy is rife in the area. In the first quarter of 2017, the Northern Cape Basic Education Head of Department appointed as headmaster of Kakamas High School a teacher who had previously impregnated a learner at that very school. The court had to eventually overturn the decision. Speaker, today and on Human Rights Day, we will hear from political parties deifying those who made a contribution in the past, like Frantz Fanon, OR Tambo, and Robert Sobukwe without looking at the pressing issues of today such as the safety of learners in schools. But I want to draw our attention back to right now, to today, and to a crisis facing our young people which we in this house can do something about. Our schools are dangerous, unsafe places for our children. We hear daily about gang rape, murder, stabbings, sexual assault, drugs, gangs – and the list goes on, but nobody is doing anything about it. It is a shame to have to force government to acknowledge this truth on Human Rights Day. With Human Rights Day next week, the DA will be launching our national school safety campaign called #SafeSchools and we are going to fight for the rights of our children. We have identified six very practical steps that can be taken right now, this year, to make our 26 000 South African schools safe places because our leaders, the Minister of Justice, Minister of Social Development, Ministers of Police and Basic Education are doing almost nothing to fix the scourge raping our schools across the nine provinces. Like the four horsemen of the biblical apocalypse, they are presiding over the destruction of our innocent youth, but we can stop them and we can fix this! In fact we must fix this – our children deserve better!  The DA’s six-point School Safety plan can and will vastly improve safety at our schools if implemented properly.       Finally, speaker, the DA is going to push the four horsemen of the ANC apocalypse off their rusty dusties to go and do their jobs, protecting our children at school. Any minister who says the current situation is acceptable must be fired. Any minister who says they have done enough about school safety is lying. The time to act is today. We will be launching our DA #SchoolSafety petition next week and invite millions of concerned parents, teachers, principals, school governing bodies and community members to sign our petition to the four ministers concerned and to the ANC government. I invite Minister Angie Motshekga, and Deputy Minister Enver Surty to be the first two to sign our petition. Our children must be safe at school. I thank you.