The Democratic Alliance (DA) opened nominations for the election of its leadership on 5 March 2018 ahead of Federal Congress, which is set to take place on 7 and 8 April 2018, at the Tshwane Events Centre. Nominations closed at 23:59 on Friday, 16 March 2018. This will be the largest congress in the history of the party, drawing over 2 000 delegates from all parts of the country, and will be reflective of the fact that the DA is the most diverse party in South Africa. The DA has exponentially grown since 2015, when it had just over 1200 delegates. The congress is being held in the Tshwane metro, where the DA-led coalition government is making great strides in fighting corruption and improving services. As the nation’s capital, the choice of venue is also symbolic of the DA’s objective of becoming a party of national government. The congress will also showcase how the DA is the only party to have grown through every election in democratic South Africa and how, as a party that governs 16 million South Africans, it has made significant progress in delivering to South Africans since the last congress in 2015. The nomination process is the first step towards electing leadership that will take the party through the campaign season, to 2019 and beyond. In terms of the clause 6.1.4 of the Federal Constitution, “The Federal Congress elects the Leader, the Federal Chairperson and the [3] Deputy Federal Chairpersons.” Furthermore, the members of the Federal  Council (155 members) will receive an additional ballot paper that will allow them to vote for the Chairperson and (two) Deputy Chairperson(s) of Federal Council, as well as the Federal Chairperson of Finance, in terms of clause 6.2.4.1 of the Federal Constitution. A constitutional amendment has been moved by the constitutional review committee to elect two (2) deputy chairpersons of the Federal Council which will be voted on during the congress. As the DA Federal Congress Chief Electoral Officer, I have the pleasure of announcing the following candidates which have been nominated: Federal DAWN Leader: Deputy Federal DAWN Leader: Federal DAWN Additional Members: Federal Youth Leader: Federal Youth Chairperson: Deputy Federal Youth Chairperson:  Administration: Deputy Federal Youth Chairperson:  Training and Development: Deputy Federal Youth Chairperson:  Media and Publicity (Uncontested): Deputy Federal Youth Chairperson:  Recruitment and Campaigns (Uncontested): Federal Finance Chairperson: Deputy Chairperson of Federal Council: Chairperson of Federal Council (Uncontested): Deputy Federal Chairpersons: Federal Chairperson: Federal Leader (Uncontested): Congress Logistics: The accreditation process will be open to the media on the 26th of March 2018, where members of the media can email the details of their respective media houses to congress@da.org.za. The media will be able to get accredited on Friday the 6th of April at the venue, the Tshwane Events Centre. In addition, a host of policies will be debated, refined and adopted at the Federal Congress. The pre-congress programme will be concluded with a press conference at the venue on Thursday the 5th of April where the media can have a guided tour of the venue and be briefed on the logistics for the weekend of the congress. The key contact people for this congress will be myself and Mabine Seabe for any queries that the media may have. Conclusion: The DA is proud of the fact that provincial congresses were conducted with no disputes declared. All processes as envisioned by the Federal Constitution were followed and we are able to constitute the Federal Congress smoothly. The DA is readying itself for national government as the only alternative to the ANC. We have proven where we govern that we can deliver a government that is corruption-free and can deliver for all. We demonstrated this sufficiently in the metros of Tshwane, Johannesburg, Nelson Mandela Bay and Cape Town, as well as in the Western Cape at large.