Our children deserve to learn in an environment that is safe so that they can realise their full potential and live a full and happy life, contributing to South Africa. Yet, daily reports of learners falling prey to crime, drugs and gangsterism, and abuse at the hands of their teachers and other staff, and how unsafe school infrastructure, such as pit latrines, continue to claim young lives. It does not have to be this way. The DA has today launched the #SafeSchools campaign at the Department of Basic Education in Tshwane. The aim of the campaign is to raise awareness of the issue of school safety general, and specifically:  These issues cannot be solved by Basic Education officials alone but the National Basic Education department working together with Ministers of Police, Social Development and Justice can take action to step up and protect our children. You can co-sign our letter to President Ramaphosa: https://ProtectOurChildren.co.za which lists seven key interventions which can be taken to improve school safety. These include: Today’s event forms part of a broader campaign and will be followed by a series of oversight visits across the country aimed at highlighting the impact that learner violence, teacher misconduct, crime and unsafe infrastructure has on pupils. Once we have gathered 20 000 signatures, we will hand these key interventions and the support we have gathered to President Cyril Ramaphosa and demand that the national ministers take active steps to make all schools safe. We also urge Minister Angie Motshekga to support our call for the departments of Basic Education, Social Development, Justice, Police and provincial departments of Basic Education to work together in ending this crisis. For too long, our children have been forced to learn in environments that are safe and detrimental to their health and well-being and which compromises their ability to reach their full potential. Without safe schools, pupils across the country will be robbed of prosperous futures. This is a situation cannot stand. We can and must take action and implement key interventions to keep our schools and our children safe.