The dysfunction and lack of accountability at the South Africa Bureau of Standards (SABS) has forced the Minister of Trade and Industry, Rob Davies, to demand that the SABS Board ‘urgently oversee a detailed process to develop a turnaround strategy for SABS’. Of major concern is that SABS seems unable to account for operational assets under its management. This was revealed in a response to a DA Parliamentary question in which we had asked the Minister to account on the concerns raised by industry players on SABS’s testing function. SABS is a statutory body established in terms of the Standards Act, 1945 and is tasked with developing, promoting and maintaining South African National Standards in terms of quality on commodities, products and services. The DA will now write to the Minister asking him to provide specific timelines as to when he expects the turnaround strategy at SABS to be finalised, including the register of assets under its management. The DA’s questions to the Minister about SABS also come on the back of SABS irregularly certifying substandard coal by Gupta-linked mines in order to facilitate the suspension imposed by Eskom and pave way for the Tegeta contract to go ahead. The admission by the Minister on SABS dysfunctionality comes as no surprise as the entity ran a R44,3 million loss in the 2016/17 financial year. It has become urgent, now more than ever, that the turnaround strategy proposed by the Minister be formulated and implemented as a matter of urgency to reverse the precarious financial position that SABS finds itself in. Further admissions by Minister Davies in response to questions I posed regarding SABS include: South Africa cannot afford to have a dysfunctional standards and certification body as this negatively impacts businesses who rely on standards for market access and growth. It is unacceptable that SABS is unable to provide information about testing facilities that are no longer functional or which need upgrading and the related costs. It exposes the poor accounting and internal control measures within SABS, which could be a violation of Public Sector Internal Audit Standards. If there is one thing we are certain about at SABS is that chaos and disorder seem to be the only benchmark that they are being measured against. The DA looks forward to receiving a time bound SABS turnaround strategy from the Minister that will ensure that sanity is restored at the entity and it continues to fulfil its statutory requirements effectively.