Please find attached soundbites in English and IsiZulu by DA Shadow Minister of Police, Zakhele Mbhele MP. The DA can confirm today that former Head of Crime Intelligence, Richard Mdluli, has received a further R4,2 million from the deeply under-resourced South African Police Service (SAPS) for doing nothing for close to a decade after an agreement reached with former Minister of Police, Fikile Mbalula, earlier this year. This was revealed in the reply to the question posed by the DA’s Adv. Hendrick Schmidt, and follows on a reply received last year that revealed that SAPS had already spent R8.3 million on Mdluli over the past 7 years. The DA submitted a complaint to the Public Service Commission in 2017. Their report, finalised earlier this year, found that “it is clear that the disciplinary process has been delayed for a period of 7 years” and SAPS’ handling of the matter demonstrated “indecisiveness and inefficiency”, impacting on the use of state resources. It is no surprise that the ANC government would find it perfectly acceptable to spend even more money on Mdluli. The ANC has normalised awarding comfortable settlements to ill-equipped and compromised individuals. If new Minister of Police, Bheki Cele, is serious about steering SAPS leadership in the right direction, he must ensure that individuals at the helm of SAPS leadership are capable of carrying out their mandate effectively and can ensure that the cries of ordinary South Africans who grapple daily with the high levels of crime in their communities are being heard. This exorbitant amount of money could be better channelled towards pressing issues such as acquiring more police vehicles which can significantly improve response time to incidents of crime. These persistent systemic weaknesses within the SAPS require urgent financial support and decisive leadership. Even more shocking is that the payment of R4 228 519 made to Mr Mdluli excludes his normal pension benefits and gratuity payable by the Government Pensions Administration Agency. The DA will submit further questions to determine the full amount that Mdluli will receive as the public deserves to know how much it has cost us to get rid of him. It is an insult to ordinary South Africans that Mdluli was awarded with a comfortable settlement after contributing absolutely nothing to public safety and to the combatting of crime in this country. South Africans deserve to have safe streets and safe homes and this can only be realised by dedicated police who are committed to fighting crime and upholding the rule of law.