The DA has received confirmation from the Inspector-General of Intelligence, Dr Setlhomamaru Dintwe, that his office has acceded to our request for an investigation into the alleged use of state resources to spy on prominent South Africans on behalf of the Gupta family. The request was submitted in July 2017 but, according to the IGI, the delay in the investigation “was occasioned by the non-cooperation of the State Security Agency (SSA) under the tenure of Mr. A. Fraser.” Our request for an investigation followed various media reports that Sahara Chief Executive and close Gupta associate, Ashu Chawla, was found in possession of sensitive, confidential and private state-held information about prominent South Africans. A copy of our request can be found here. The need for the IGI to complete this crucial investigation is now more urgent than ever considering the important work of the Zondo Commission. Indeed, the IGI’s findings in this and other ongoing investigations into the abuse of SSA resources should presented to the commission. The confirmation that the IGI is finally investigating the SSA’s relationship with the Guptas follows hot on the heels of the signing of treaties on Extradition and Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters between South Africa and the United Arab Emirates where the Guptas are believed to be hiding. The time has come for South Africa to be presented with a complete picture of how the ANC-led government sold the country to the Guptas, including our intelligence resources. We welcome the work being done by the IGI now that the Minister of State Security, Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba, has been forced to reinstate his security clearance. However, the DA still contends that President Cyril Ramaphosa’s decision to appoint Arthur Fraser as National Commissioner of Correctional Services was unconstitutional and irrational. In May the DA filed papers with the Pretoria High Court to have his appointment reviewed and set aside. Fraser should have been fired and criminally charged, not redeployed. The DA will continue to fight for the de-politicising of our intelligence service.