The City of Johannesburg is saddened by the destruction and loss suffered by hundreds of families as a result of a fire that swept through about 500 shacks in Alexandra yesterday, 6 December 2018.  We are, however, relieved to report that the fire has been completely extinguished with no injury or casualty reported at the scene.  At about 4 pm yesterday the Johannesburg Emergency Management Services (EMS) received an emergency call to assist with a fire in the Greenville informal township on Vincent Tshbalala Road (formerly London Road) in Alexandra. The Johannesburg Metropolitan Police Department (JMPD) and South African Police Services (SAPS) were also in the scene to assist.  On arriving at the scene the firefighters was met with an inferno and immediately began to evacuate the residents in the area to safety.  EMS dispatched three fire engines to the scene to extinguish the blaze but battled to find a fire hydrant in the area. The only nearby fire hydrant could not be fully utilized because of low water pressure. The fire engines ultimately had to replenish the water tank every 20 minutes, making several trips back and forth.  EMS is thankful for the additional water tankers which was provided by the Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality in assisting the firefighting efforts. It is most unfortunate that building shacks on top of the fire hydrants is common practice in the area. The remaining available fire hydrants are often vandalized. The Member of the Mayoral Committee (MMC) for Public Safety, Michael Sun, says, “We are devastated to hear of the fire which have left hundreds of Alexandra residents homeless. Our firefighters were able to control the blaze under very difficult circumstances. We will ensure that those affected receive assistance and emergency shelters are being arranged by the Disaster Management Unit.”  City’s Disaster Management Unit arrived shortly after the fire broke out to assist with temporary emergency shelter at East Bank Hall and other emergency relief. Organisations like the Gift of the Givers were also available to assist. We thank these organistions, which include the Zaka International Rescue Unit that assisted with efforts to bring down the blaze. Pick n Pay Alexandra are the provision of food stuffs to those affected, the Al-Imdaad Foundation for their assistance in the provision of rehabilitation resources for fire fighters, and Pace Car Rental for assisting with a truck to move household goods.  We are truly thankful for these kind efforts, which are deeply needed by the distressed community.  The City together with its relief partners will continue to provide food, blankets, hygiene packs and other materials in order to assist the victims of this devastating fire.