The Democratic Alliance (DA) notes with concern revelations of corruption involving the awarding of degrees at two KwaZulu-Natal universities. Rumours have emerged that the Head of the Graduate School of Business Leadership at the University of KwaZulu-Natal (UKZN) and his entire senior staff have been suspended after it was revealed that staff allegedly took bribes for marks and have allowed plagiarised dissertations to be submitted. Investigations into these corrupt practices have since been instituted. This follows an incident at the University of Zululand in May this year, in which Professor Gregory Kamwendo, the Dean of the Faculty of Arts, was tragically shot dead. Reports now claim that his murder was allegedly orchestrated by those implicated in a serious criminal enterprise involving the awarding of fraudulent marks and PhDs. Kamwendo had reportedly uncovered the academics involved in these acts of corruption, and it would appear that his integrity led to his sad and untimely death. The DA will write to the vice-chancellor of the University of Zululand, requesting feedback on internal and external investigations into the death of Professor Kamwendo, to ensure justice is served. We also call on universities to dramatically strengthen their external examining systems and to institute annual quality audits of their degrees, as the range and depth of corruption involving the awarding of degrees is increasing. Universities have the responsibility of ensuring that graduates claiming to have qualifications are worthy of them. Without quality control, the field is left open for the formation of cozy internal syndicates which nobody oversees, and it allows corrupt individuals the opportunity to engage in the racket of giving degrees out in exchange for bribes. The losers, in the end, are the students. Situations in which bribes for marks occur result in the devaluation of degrees over time, even if the qualification is held by an honest graduate. The UKZN MBA will undoubtedly suffer severe reputation damage as a result of these rumours and if they prove to be true, the university will be obliged to trace every single student involved and take legal action against them. The degrees of those found to have engaged in bribery will also have to be rescinded. As for the University of Zululand, far more serious action needs to take place. This University has been alerted of an alleged syndicate of corruption by a senior whistleblower – who has apparently paid for his noble action with his life. This tragic fact only adds to the sense that this is a university in which the depth of institutional decay seems profound.  To some of its staff, it appears, fraudulent practices are valued over and above the life of a human being. Too many lives have already been lost to the culture of corruption in South Africa. Under a DA government, anyone found guilty of corruption would be sentenced to 15 years in jail – and the safety of whistle-blowers would be protected. A DA government would also implement policy that oversees tight quality control mechanisms in our universities, in order to safeguard the legitimacy and value of a South African degree.