The statement below follows an Essential Services Committee briefing on essential services in basic education, where DA Shadow Minister of Basic Education, Nomsa Marchesi MP, made a verbal submission. Please find attached soundbites by Nomsa Marchesi MP in isiXhosa, Sesotho and English and in Afrikaans by DA Member of the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education, Sonja Boshoff MP. Please also find soundbites from concerned parents here and here. Today, DA Shadow Minister of Basic Education, Nomsa Marchesi MP, and DA Member of the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education, Sonja Boshoff MP, attended the Essential Services Committee (ESC) hearing on establishing a minimum service level for school staff. The DA wants a minimum presence of school staff during school hours to ensure that learners do not fall victim to any harm and Nomsa Marchesi MP called for this at today’s hearing. The South African Democratic Teachers Union (SADTU), however, continues to misrepresent the DA’s position by claiming that we wish to curb the rights of all teachers to strike taken away. This is not true. The DA wants some school staff to be present at schools during strike action and union meetings to ensure learner safety. Our submission to the ESC is based on three main concerns: Establishing a minimum service level for school staff will not only improve the safety of learners; it will also ensure they can learn without fear and work towards securing better futures for themselves and their families. Our unemployment rate is now at 9.5 million South Africans and it is irresponsible of SADTU to oppose this call. The union is effectively jeopardising children’s futures by refusing to bring about a safer learning environment for learners. The DA calls on SADTU to prioritise the safety of children and stop playing politics at the expense of learners’ rights. We also trust that the ESC will favourably consider the submissions we have made over the last week in the interests of our children and their futures.