The Democratic Alliance in North West calls upon ANC President Cyril Ramaphosa to intervene and save what is left of the North West. Premier Supra Mahumapelo is no longer governing with a mandate from the people but is rather ruling like a dictator. He is being propped up by a self-interested cabal, which is working to loot the people’s money until there is nothing left to steal. The reality is that this is a mess of Ramaphosa, who has accommodated Mahumaphelo’s lies and arrogance. If he had acted swiftly, we would not be here today. The people in North West have spoken and they took to the streets as they want the Premier to step down. Mahumapelo’s clinging to power has resulted in strikes in the province severely affecting businesses, teaching time and the safety of all communities. Healthcare at most hospitals and clinics has come to a complete standstill. There is no medicine available – not even for child immunisations. His mention of political conspiracies and agendas against him is just another way of passing the buck.  This is the same tactic deployed by Jacob Zuma during times of pressure. The people are not fooled. His sudden outburst against corruption and poor contractors during a media briefing was amusing – especially taking into consideration that his offices were raided by the Hawks and there are outstanding investigations into corruption against him. As long as Ramaphosa drags his feet and does not recall Mahumapelo, the more the people of North West will suffer. Keeping Supra as the ANC Chairperson in North West will also be an opportunity to still rule from behind the scenes. The ANC and Mahumaphelo have again ignored the voices of the people and we will hold them accountable for any further destruction and losses due to the Supra Power Trip. It is therefore up to the people of the North West to bring Total Change to the North West by voting for the Democratic Alliance, which has a proud track record of putting the people first by stopping corruption, creating jobs and delivering services.