Please find attached English and isiZulu soundbites by the DA Shadow Minister of Social Development, Bridget Masango MP. Today the Democratic Alliance (DA) laid charges of perjury against Minister Bathabile Dlamini at the Johannesburg Central Police Station.  The charges follow the damning judgement in which the Constitutional Court requested that the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) consider whether Dlamini should be prosecuted for lying under oath during her testimony at the Judge Bernard Ngoepe Inquiry into the social grants crisis. While the NPA considers charging her, it is vital that all avenues to hold her to account are used to make sure she will not continue to dodge facing the consequences of putting the lives of millions at risk. Retired Judge Bernard Ngoepe, who lead the Inquiry into her role in the 2017 social grants debacle, offered a scathing assessment of Dlamini’s testimony. Judge Ngoepe’s findings strongly suggested that “some of Minister Dlamini’s evidence under oath in the affidavits before this [Constitutional] Court and orally before the Inquiry was false” and that the Minister may have “misled the Court to protect herself from the consequences of her behaviour”. Last week, the Constitutional Court branded the Minister as “reckless and grossly negligent”. Dlamini clearly has no place in government. It is clear from her actions that she does not care for the millions of vulnerable South Africans who depend on social grants every month just to feed their loved ones. President Cyril Ramaphosa is harbouring individuals in his Cabinet who are Constitutionally and morally bankrupt and have very little regard for the laws and people of the country. It is for this reason the DA has given President Ramaphosa until Friday, 5 October, to remove Dlamini from his Cabinet. It is now in the hands of the South African Police Services to investigate these charges against Minister Dlamini and up to the NPA to ensure that she is prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. Dodging Dlamini can no longer run away from accountability. The DA will continue to explore all possible avenues to ensure that she has her day in court. Please download pictures here and here.