Please find attached soundbites by Nqaba Bhanga, DA EC Premier Candidate, in IsiXhosa and English. Also find attached a soundbite in IsiXhosa by a resident visited. These remarks were delivered during the launch of the Premier Candidate’s Listening Tour in KwaZakhele. Today I launched my Premier Listening Tour in Nobatana Street in KwaZakhele, the area where I grew up.  The purpose of the Listening Tour is to listen to and engage with Eastern Cape residents about issues they face on a daily basis. I spent my formative years in KwaZakhele and I am fully aware of the challenges that face the poor and suffering people of our province. I visited four households in Nobatana Street and quality housing, which is a competence of the national government, and unemployment seem to be creating the most suffering. Most of the houses are in desperate need of rectification and damaged roofs, leaking toilets and pipes, broken doors and windows and even a total lack of water and electricity cause great suffering. Nelson Mandela Bay townships, like KwaZakhele, were prioritised under the previous DA-led coalition government. Construction projects took place, roads were tarred, streetlights were installed and rubbish dumps were turned into parks. All of this will now be undone by the ANC-led coalition of corruption in charge of NMB. The progress the DA-led coalition made in bringing opportunities to NMB townships, is something that a DA government will roll out to all townships in our beautiful province. A DA government will speed up the delivery of basic services and create fair access to real and long-term jobs The DA is also committed to: The 2019 election is the people’s chance to get our province back on track. It is their chance to choose – we can allow the EC to become more unequal, more corrupt and more uncaring. Or we can choose change that builds a better future for all the people. A vote for the ANC is a vote for more empty promises and more orruption. Only the DA can bring the real change that builds a better future for the EC and One South Africa for All. Please click here, here and here to download pictures. 