The following speech was delivered today in the National Assembly by DA National Spokesperson, Solly Malatsi MP. The untold story of the state of our nation is one of the legacy of the ANC’s broken promises. Vutivhi Maswanganyi from Masodi Village in Mokopane is one of thousands of children who walk long distances to school because scholar transport in Limpopo is dysfunctional. Nozimasila Mxwila from Upper Xhwili Village, 40km outside of Mthatha, is of many South Africans in rural areas without access to electricity. S’busiso Mthembu from Kliptown is one of 3.1 million young South Africans who are not in employment, education and training. Each one of these people’s testimonies represents the ANC’s broken promises. Their aspirations for dignity have been crushed by the ANC failure to deliver basic services in different spheres of government. In 1994 they were sent to serve, promising “a better life for all”, and they broke that promise. In 2014, they were sent to serve, promising that “together we move South Africa forward”, and they broke that promise, too. There is no doubt that next year they will make another courageous promise that won’t change the lives of poor South Africans. And they will recycle the same old leaders who will continue to fail in government. One such leader is the Minister Nomvula Mokonyane who presided over the momentous collapse of the Department of Water and Sanitation. Minister Mokonyane, how do you sleep at night knowing that communities from Shivulani Village to Xawela Village have to wash their laundry in a river fighting off animals? Minister Mokonyane, how do you enjoy the luxury of services in your ministerial home while mothers in Giyani go several days without bathing because there is no clean water. It is ironic that people like Minister Nomvula Mokonyane are now frontline cheerleaders who chant “Thuma Mina” masquerading as disciples of a “New Dawn” when their actions stole from the poor when they were sent to serve. For these crooks, Thuma Mina is an opportunistic clarion call to complete their unfinished business of stealing from the poor. So fellow South Africans, don’t be fooled by the slogans and spin. Next year’s election will be a choice between a failing ANC with failing leaders and failing ideas against the DA’s offer of building One South Africa for all. It will be a choice between the ANC’s long record of broken promises versus the DA’s consistent record of delivery. Where the ANC seeks to divide our nation through racial polarisation, we aim to unite all South Africans. Where the ANC seeks to shields comrades in government from accountability, the DA takes action regardless of the seniority or popularity of the office bearer. Honourable Members, our country needs change so that people like Vutivhi, Nozimasile, and S’busiso can realise their dreams. We need change that will ensure that our communities are safe. Change that that will protect the rights of both South Africans and foreign nationals alike by securing our borders. Change that will speed up the provision of better services. Change that will create fair access to jobs to all those in search of work. And only the DA can deliver the change that South Africa needs to succeed. Kea leboga